.ig
unbound.8 -- unbound manual

Copyright (c) 2007, NLnet Labs. All rights reserved.

This software is open source.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:

Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice,
this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation
and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

Neither the name of the NLNET LABS nor the names of its contributors may
be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without
specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
"AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

..
.Dd @date@
.Dt unbound 8
.Sh NAME
unbound
.Nd Unbound DNS validating resolver @version@.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm unbound
.Op Fl h
.Op Fl p Ar port
.Op Fl f Ar ip
.Op Fl z Ar port
.Op Fl v

.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Ic Unbound 
is an implementation of a DNS resolver, that does caching and 
DNSSEC validation.
.Pp
The available options are:
.Bl -tag -width indent

.It Fl h
Show the version and commandline option help.

.It Fl p Ar port
Start listening on the given port. Default is port 53(DNS).

.It Fl f Ar ip
Set forwarder address. DNS queries will be forwarded to this server.

.It Fl z Ar ip
Set forwarder port. DNS queries will be forwarded to this port.

.It Fl v
Increase verbosity. If given multiple times, more information is logged.

.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr resolv.conf 5

.Sh AUTHORS
.Ic Unbound
developers are mentioned in the CREDITS file in the distribution.
